add first draft of new machine charm tutorial (#1999)
canonical/operator: docs/tutorial/write-a-machine-charm-for-tinyproxy.md

# Write a machine charm for tinyproxy

```{important}
This tutorial is a **work in progress**. Some steps don't work yet. For now, please use [](./write-your-first-machine-charm).
```

TODO:

- What you'll need.
- One/two sentence summary of what you'll do.
- How to get help, including linking to the code in the Ops repo.

## Study your application

TODO:

- Briefly introduce tinyproxy.
- Briefly introduce how a machine charm works.

> - Summarise the experience the charm will provide - reverse proxy with a configurable slug.

Reviewer: Is this going to be a principal or a subordinate charm?

Author: Hmm, I hadn't thought about that. My understanding is a bit limited here, but principal, I guess? Because it's not going to be integrated with anything in the tutorial

Reviewer: I suppose the question is what is tinyproxy proxying in this scenario?

A related app: separate charm, principal<->principal relation
Some local workload shipped in a separate charm: probably makes tinyproxy a subordinate
Some local workload that's deployed by this very charm: a standalone principal

Reviewer 2: For what it's worth, our docs on subordinates are almost non-existent, so that would be interesting. I don't think adding a relation would make the tutorial significantly more complicated, although you could start with it being some local thing and then in the future we adjust it.

At the moment it's being used as basically a short URL service, which maybe is fine (the workload is not the point, after all). But actually running as a reverse proxy would probably seem more realistic.

- Suggest using nano to edit files.

## Write your charm

### Write a helper module

Your charm will interact with tinyproxy, so it's a good idea to start by writing a helper module that wraps tinyproxy.
Charmcraft created `src/tinyproxy.py` as a placeholder helper module.

The helper module will be independent of the main logic of your charm. This will make it easier to test your charm. However, the helper module won't be a general-purpose wrapper for tinyproxy. The helper module will contain opinionated functions for managing tinyproxy on Ubuntu.

The helper module will depend on some libraries that are useful when writing charms. Add the libraries to your charm's dependencies:

```text
uv add charmlibs-apt charmlibs-pathops
```

This has added the following Python packages to the `dependencies` list in `pyproject.toml`:

- `charmlibs-apt` - A library for using APT to manage system packages. This is how your charm will install tinyproxy.
- `charmlibs-pathops` - A file operations library, similar to `pathlib` from the standard library.

Next, replace the contents of `src/tinyproxy.py` by:

```python
import logging
import os
import re
import shutil
import signal
import subprocess

> from charmlibs import apt, pathops

Author: The `charmlibs-apt` package hasn't been published to PyPI, so importing `apt` will fail at the moment. My plan is to wait for `charmlibs-apt` to be published before finishing the tutorial. In the meantime, I've tested the code using `apt` from https://github.com/canonical/charmlibs/tree/main/apt

logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

CONFIG_FILE = "/etc/tinyproxy/tinyproxy.conf"
PID_FILE = "/var/run/tinyproxy.pid"

def check_slug(slug: str) -> None:
    """Check that the URL slug is valid. Raise ValueError otherwise."""
    if not re.fullmatch(r"[a-z0-9-]+", slug):
        raise ValueError(f"Invalid slug: '{slug}'. Slug must match the regex [a-z0-9-]+")

def ensure_config(port: int, slug: str) -> bool:
    """Ensure that tinyproxy is configured. Return True if any changes were made."""
    # For the config file format, see https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/en/man5/tinyproxy.conf.5.html
    config = f"""\
PidFile "{PID_FILE}"
Port {port}
Timeout 600
ReverseOnly Yes

> ReversePath "/{slug}/" "http://www.example.com/"

Reviewer 2: Hmm, but then reading later where you test with curl, maybe it's more complicated in that case and since this is all in the VM maybe it doesn't matter?

"""
    return pathops.ensure_contents(CONFIG_FILE, config)

def install() -> None:
    """Use APT to install the tinyproxy executable."""
    apt.update()
    try:

>         apt.add_package("tinyproxy-bin")

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this should install a specific version? For the tutorial it's probably more convenient to not do that, and not needed. However, it does seem to be what most machine charms do, to make their upgrade and QA processes simpler.

(But not the config for installing different versions like the existing tutorial - that seems a strange thing to do).

    except apt.PackageError as e:

>         logger.error("Unable to install tinyproxy-bin. %s", e.message)

Author: Good point. I've replaced the catch & re-raise by a comment:

```
apt.add_package("tinyproxy-bin")
# If this call fails, the charm will go into error status. The Juju logs will show the error:
# charmlibs.apt.PackageError: Failed to install packages: tinyproxy-bin
```

Here's my general thinking about how to approach error handling in the tutorial charm:

- Make the charm as resilient as reasonably possible. Catch errors if they can be recovered from
- Also catch errors if the user would be able to unblock the charm
- Otherwise, let errors bubble up for a charmer to investigate. Add a comment in the source to call attention to points where errors might happen

        raise

def is_installed() -> bool:
    """Return whether the tinyproxy executable is available."""
    return shutil.which("tinyproxy") is not None

def is_running() -> bool:
    """Return whether tinyproxy is running."""
    return pathops.LocalPath(PID_FILE).exists()

def start() -> None:
    """Start tinyproxy."""

>     subprocess.run(["tinyproxy"], check=True)

Author: Thanks for reminding me about this best practice. tinyproxy doesn't output anything meaningful, but I've added `capture_output=True` to make sure that nothing falls though to Juju.

Good idea to wait for tinyproxy to run. I've added a `wait_for_running()` method on the charm class, similar to what we do in the Charmcraft K8s profile:

```python
def wait_for_running(self) -> None:
    """Wait for tinyproxy to be running."""
    for _ in range(3):
        if tinyproxy.is_running():
            return
        time.sleep(1)
    raise RuntimeError("tinyproxy was not running within the expected time")
    # Raising a runtime error will put the charm into error status. The error message is for
    # you (the charm author) to see in the Juju logs, not for the user of the charm.
```

I'm calling this method immediately after `tinyproxy.start()`.

def stop() -> None:
    """Stop tinyproxy."""

>     os.kill(_get_pid(), signal.SIGTERM)

Author: Good point, thanks. I've checked that the pidfile disappears when tinyproxy stops. So it looks to be a robust indicator of whether tinyproxy is running.

In addressing one of Tony's comments, I added a method to wait for tinyproxy to start (i.e., waiting for the pidfile). I've just added a corresponding method that waits for tinyproxy to stop:

```python
def wait_for_not_running(self) -> None:
    """Wait for tinyproxy to not be running."""
    for _ in range(3):
        if not tinyproxy.is_running():
            return
        time.sleep(1)
    raise RuntimeError("tinyproxy was still running after the expected time")
```

I'm calling this right after `tinyproxy.stop()`.

def reload_config() -> None:
    """Ask tinyproxy to reload config."""
    # See https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/en/man8/tinyproxy.8.html#signals
    os.kill(_get_pid(), signal.SIGUSR1)

> 

Reviewer 2: I know we don't want to make the tutorial charm too large/complex, but maybe setting the workload version would be nice? I assume tinyproxy provides a nice way to get this. It's in the charmcraft profile with a placeholder, right? It's also a nice thing to test against, since it's in the Juju state.

Author: Good idea, this only required a little bit extra code

def _get_pid() -> int:
    """Return the PID of tinyproxy."""

>     return int(pathops.LocalPath(PID_FILE).read_text())

Author: I tested `int(" 42 \n") == 42`, so I think we're good re strip. But I can add strip if you think it's clearer that way

Re Dima's points: I've gone with returning `int | None` instead. I'll reply in more detail in [this thread](https://github.com/canonical/operator/pull/1999/files#r2292818625)

```

Notice that the helper module is stateless. In fact, your charm as a whole will be stateless. The main logic of your charm will:

1. Receive an event from Juju. For example, the `start` event, meaning "it's time to start tinyproxy".
2. Use the functions in the helper module to manage tinyproxy and check its status.
3. Report the status back to Juju.

```{tip}
After adding code to your charm, run `tox -e lint` to check the code against coding style standards and run static checks. If the code has formatting issues, you can use `tox -e format` to format the code.
```

### Define a configuration option

TODO: Add commentary to this section.

`charmcraft.yaml`:

```yaml
config:
  options:
    slug:
      description: |
        Configures the path of the reverse proxy.

        Must match the regex [a-z0-9-]+
      default: example
      type: string
```

`src/charm.py`:

```python

> @dataclasses.dataclass(frozen=True)

Author: We discussed this in Charm Tech daily yesterday and agreed to use Pydantic.

        except ValueError as e:
            event.add_status(ops.BlockedStatus(str(e)))
        if not tinyproxy.is_installed():
            event.add_status(ops.MaintenanceStatus("Waiting for tinyproxy to be installed"))
        if not tinyproxy.is_running():
            event.add_status(ops.MaintenanceStatus("Waiting for tinyproxy to start"))
        event.add_status(ops.ActiveStatus())

    def _on_install(self, event: ops.InstallEvent) -> None:
        """Install tinyproxy on the machine."""
        if not tinyproxy.is_installed():
            tinyproxy.install()

    def _on_start(self, event: ops.StartEvent) -> None:
        """Handle start event."""
        self._configure_and_restart()

    def _on_config_changed(self, event: ops.ConfigChangedEvent) -> None:
        """Handle config-changed event."""
        self._configure_and_restart()

    def _on_stop(self, event: ops.StopEvent) -> None:
        """Handle stop event."""
        tinyproxy.stop()

    def _configure_and_restart(self) -> None:
        """Ensure that tinyproxy is running with the correct config."""
        try:
            config = self.load_config(TinyproxyConfig)
        except ValueError:

>             return

Reviewer 2: For a tutorial I think it's worth having a comment here explaining that collect-status will be handling letting the user know about the problem.

Author: I've added a comment:

```
# The collect-status handler will run next and will set status for the user to see.
```

### Try the proxy

TODO: Add commentary to this section.

```text
curl <address>:8000/example/
```

Output:

```text
<!doctype html>
<html>
<head>
    <title>Example Domain</title>
    ...
</head>

<body>
<div>
    <h1>Example Domain</h1>
    <p>This domain is for use in illustrative examples in documents. You may use this
    domain in literature without prior coordination or asking for permission.</p>
    <p><a href="https://www.iana.org/domains/example">More information...</a></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
```

### Change the configuration

TODO: Add commentary to this section.

```text
juju config tinyproxy slug=foo
curl <address>:8000/foo/  # Returns the same HTML as before.
curl <address>:8000/example/  # Returns an error page.
juju config tinyproxy slug=foo/bar  # Puts the charm into blocked status.
juju config tinyproxy --reset slug  # Makes the charm active, with the original config.
```

## Write unit tests for your charm

### Write tests for the helper module

TODO: Add commentary to this section.

`tests/unit/test_tinyproxy.py`:

```python
import pytest

from charm import tinyproxy

def test_slug_valid():
    tinyproxy.check_slug("example")  # No error raised.

> def test_slug_invalid():

Reviewer 2: It's only a tutorial, so maybe this doesn't matter, but I think it would be nice to have this parametrised, to show how that is done. Just 2-3 examples of bad slugs, for example, like the empty string, something with an underscore, ...

    with pytest.raises(ValueError):
        tinyproxy.check_slug("foo/bar")
```

### Write state-transition tests

TODO: Add commentary to this section.

`tests/unit/test_charm.py`:

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass

import pytest
from ops import testing

from charm import PORT, TinyproxyCharm

@dataclass

> class MockTinyproxy:

Reviewer 2: It seems a bit odd to use a dataclass here. You're only really using it for the init, right? Not the rest of what a dataclass gives, like eq, hash, easy dumping to JSON, etc. I feel like this would be more natural as just a plain class with an explicit init.

I do, however, like how clean having the workload interaction in a module makes this mocking.

    def stop(self) -> None:
        self.running = False

    def reload_config(self) -> None:
        self.reloaded_config = True

def patch_charm(monkeypatch: pytest.MonkeyPatch, tinyproxy: MockTinyproxy):
    """Patch the helper module to use mock functions for interacting with tinyproxy."""
    monkeypatch.setattr("charm.tinyproxy.ensure_config", tinyproxy.ensure_config)
    monkeypatch.setattr("charm.tinyproxy.install", tinyproxy.install)
    monkeypatch.setattr("charm.tinyproxy.is_installed", tinyproxy.is_installed)
    monkeypatch.setattr("charm.tinyproxy.is_running", tinyproxy.is_running)
    monkeypatch.setattr("charm.tinyproxy.start", tinyproxy.start)
    monkeypatch.setattr("charm.tinyproxy.stop", tinyproxy.stop)
    monkeypatch.setattr("charm.tinyproxy.reload_config", tinyproxy.reload_config)

def test_install(monkeypatch: pytest.MonkeyPatch):
    """Test that the charm correctly handles the install event."""
    # Arrange:
    tinyproxy = MockTinyproxy()
    patch_charm(monkeypatch, tinyproxy)
    ctx = testing.Context(TinyproxyCharm)
    # Act:
    ctx.run(ctx.on.install(), testing.State())
    # Assert:
    assert tinyproxy.is_installed()

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth asserting on the unit status here too.

    # Arrange:
    tinyproxy = MockTinyproxy(config=(PORT, "example"), installed=True, running=True)
    patch_charm(monkeypatch, tinyproxy)
    ctx = testing.Context(TinyproxyCharm)
    state_in = testing.State(config={"slug": "foo"})
    # Act:
    state_out = ctx.run(ctx.on.config_changed(), state_in)
    # Assert:
    assert state_out.unit_status == testing.ActiveStatus()
    assert tinyproxy.is_running()
    assert tinyproxy.config == (PORT, "foo")
    assert tinyproxy.reloaded_config

def test_start_invalid_config(monkeypatch: pytest.MonkeyPatch):
    """Test that the charm fails to start if the config is invalid."""
    # Arrange:
    tinyproxy = MockTinyproxy(installed=True)
    patch_charm(monkeypatch, tinyproxy)
    ctx = testing.Context(TinyproxyCharm)
    state_in = testing.State(config={"slug": "foo/bar"})  # Invalid value!
    # Act:
    state_out = ctx.run(ctx.on.start(), state_in)
    # Assert:
    assert state_out.unit_status == testing.BlockedStatus(
        "Invalid slug: 'foo/bar'. Slug must match the regex [a-z0-9-]+"
    )
    assert not tinyproxy.is_running()
    assert tinyproxy.config is None

> def test_config_changed_invalid_config(monkeypatch: pytest.MonkeyPatch):

Reviewer 2: Alternatively/additionally, this could have the parameterisation of bad values.

    # Assert:
    assert state_out.unit_status == testing.BlockedStatus(
        "Invalid slug: 'foo/bar'. Slug must match the regex [a-z0-9-]+"
    )
    assert tinyproxy.is_running()  # tinyproxy should still be running...
    assert tinyproxy.config == (PORT, "example")  # ...with the original config.
    assert not tinyproxy.reloaded_config

def test_stop(monkeypatch: pytest.MonkeyPatch):
    """Test that the charm correctly handles the stop event."""
    # Arrange:
    tinyproxy = MockTinyproxy(installed=True)
    patch_charm(monkeypatch, tinyproxy)
    ctx = testing.Context(TinyproxyCharm)
    # Act:
    state_out = ctx.run(ctx.on.stop(), testing.State())
    # Assert:
    assert state_out.unit_status == testing.MaintenanceStatus("Waiting for tinyproxy to start")
    assert not tinyproxy.is_running()
```

### Run the tests

TODO: Add commentary to this section.

```text
tox -e unit
```

## Tear things down

TODO:

- How to remove the application from Juju.
- How to save the code that you created inside the virtual machine.
- How to stop the virtual machine.
- How to delete the virtual machine.
- How to uninstall Multipass.

## Next steps

> TODO:

Author: Yes :slightly_smiling_face: in a follow-up PR

- Links to more detail on the concepts covered in the tutorial.
- Suggestions for real machine charms to look at.
- Suggestions for what to learn next, e.g., learn about relations.

> - Challenge: Try modifying this tutorial charm to make the port configurable too.

Author: I like your challenge too! I was thinking through options:

1. Implement the challenges in the example charm, but not in the tutorial
2. Implement the challenges in the example charm. In the tutorial, briefly mention how to implement and use them (e.g., how to run the action)
3. Have an "extended" example charm that implements the challenges

I don't have a preference at the moment. For now, I've tracked the challenges as a TODO for after the first version of the tutorial is published. I'll remove my note from the draft

    # If this call fails, the charm will go into error status. The Juju logs will show the error:
    # charmlibs.apt.PackageError: Failed to install packages: tinyproxy-bin

def is_installed() -> bool:
    """Return whether the tinyproxy executable is available."""
    return shutil.which("tinyproxy") is not None

def is_running() -> bool:
    """Return whether tinyproxy is running."""
    return bool(_get_pid())

def start() -> None:
    """Start tinyproxy."""
    subprocess.run(["tinyproxy"], check=True, capture_output=True, text=True)

def stop() -> None:
    """Stop tinyproxy."""
    pid = _get_pid()
    if pid:
        os.kill(pid, signal.SIGTERM)

def reload_config() -> None:
    """Ask tinyproxy to reload config."""
    pid = _get_pid()
    if not pid:
        raise RuntimeError("tinyproxy is not running")
    # See https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/en/man8/tinyproxy.8.html#signals
    os.kill(pid, signal.SIGUSR1)

def _get_pid() -> int | None:
    """Return the PID of the tinyproxy process, or None if the process can't be found."""
    if not pathops.LocalPath(PID_FILE).exists():
        return None
    pid = int(pathops.LocalPath(PID_FILE).read_text())

>     # Check that we can send signals to the process.
>     try:
>         os.kill(pid, 0)

Reviewer: How about this instead?

```suggestion
    try:
        # Signal 0 doesn’t terminate the process; it just checks if the PID exists.
        os.kill(pid, 0)
```

Author: Thanks a lot, I wasn't sure what to write here. You've put it very nicely. Updated a couple of places:

```py
def reload_config() -> None:
    """Ask tinyproxy to reload config."""
    pid = _get_pid()
    if not pid:
        raise RuntimeError("tinyproxy is not running")
    # Sending signal SIGUSR1 doesn't terminate the process. It asks the process to reload config.
    # See https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/en/man8/tinyproxy.8.html#signals
    os.kill(pid, signal.SIGUSR1)

def _get_pid() -> int | None:
    """Return the PID of the tinyproxy process, or None if the process can't be found."""
    if not pathops.LocalPath(PID_FILE).exists():
        return None
    pid = int(pathops.LocalPath(PID_FILE).read_text())
    try:
        # Sending signal 0 doesn't terminate the process. It just checks whether the PID exists.
        os.kill(pid, 0)
    except ProcessLookupError:
        return None
    return pid
```

    except ProcessLookupError:
        return None
    return pid
```

Notice that the helper module is stateless. In fact, your charm as a whole will be stateless. The main logic of your charm will:

> 1. Receive an event from Juju. For example, the `start` event, meaning "it's time to start tinyproxy".

Reviewer: This is sadly incorrect.
"start" means this unit has started.
it may or may not be able to start the workload... because the storage is not attached yet.

See https://discourse.charmhub.io/t/charm-lifecycle/5938

def stop() -> None:
    """Stop tinyproxy."""
    pid = _get_pid()
    if pid:
        os.kill(pid, signal.SIGTERM)

def reload_config() -> None:
    """Ask tinyproxy to reload config."""
    pid = _get_pid()

>     if pid:

Reviewer: Arguably, the call should then `.wait(pid)` to make sure that the tiny proxy has finished quitting.

Author: This part is about sending a signal to tinyproxy to reload the config file, without quitting the process. So I don't think we can wait for anything here. In the part that really sends a signal to quit tinyproxy, the charm code waits to make sure it's stopped

I reliase that I should add a clarifying comment here, to say that `kill` is not stopping the process. Similar to your suggestion for `kill(pid, 0)`, which I think is an excellent idea

        # Raising a runtime error will put the charm into error status. The error message is for
        # you (the charm author) to see in the Juju logs, not for the user of the charm.

    def wait_for_not_running(self) -> None:
        """Wait for tinyproxy to not be running."""
        for _ in range(3):
            if not tinyproxy.is_running():
                return
            time.sleep(1)
        raise RuntimeError("tinyproxy was still running after the expected time")

> if __name__ == "__main__":  # pragma: nocover

Reviewer: This function is only used once, why not inline it in `stop()`?

Author: Sorry, this doesn't properly answer your question. I could inline it in `_on_stop()` in charm.py or `stop()` in tinyproxy.py without having to change `return` - my oversight.

To answer your actual question, "why not inline it in `stop()`"? The approach I was taking is that the code in charm.py is responsible for deciding how long to wait for stuff to happen. Somehow aligning with a K8s-based approach where charm.py asks Pebble to do something and then waits to check it's been done.

If you think that's misguided here, I can inline in `stop()` in tinyproxy.py
